---
title: "Code book for result.txt"
author: "Juanhe Tan"
date: "2 December 2018"
output: html_document
---

This is a codebook for result.txt.

result.txt is the data set generated by performing run_analysis.R in the folder
"UCI HAR Dataset", which can be downloaded from [here](http://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/machine-learning-databases/00240/) 
or [here](https://d396qusza40orc.cloudfront.net/getdata%2Fprojectfiles%2FUCI%20HAR%20Dataset.zip).

The UCI HAR dataset is the data generated from experiments on Human Activity
Recognition (HAR) Using Smartphones. (Davide Anguita, Alessandro Ghio, Luca 
Oneto, Xavier Parra and Jorge L. Reyes-Ortiz. Human Activity Recognition on 
Smartphones using a Multiclass Hardware-Friendly Support Vector Machine. 
International Workshop of Ambient Assisted Living (IWAAL 2012). Vitoria-Gasteiz, 
Spain. Dec 2012)

These experiments took recordings from 30 
subjects performing activities of daily living while carrying a waist-mounted
smartphone. For more details, see [here](http://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets/Human+Activity+Recognition+Using+Smartphones).

result.txt has 181 rows (comprising 1 header row and 180 observations) and 68
columns (comprising 1 subject, 1 activity, and 66 variables derived from the UCI
HAR measurements). result.txt is sorted by subject, then activity. Details on
each column is provided below.

## subject

The "subject" column is a factor with 30 levels (1-30). Each factor represents
a unique subject who participated in the HAR experiments.

The 30 subjects had been split into 2 groups in the UCI HAR Dataset - 9 in
"test" and 21 in "train". result.txt has combined all the subjects into one big
group of 30.

## activity

The "activity" column is a factor with 6 levels (laying, sitting, standing, 
walking, walkingdownstairs, walkingupstairs). These are the activities of daily 
living that each subjects perform for the HAR experiments.

The 6 activity labels were obtained from the UCI HAR Dataset's "activity_labels"
file, but with digits, spaces and underscores removed, and all in lowercase.

Since there are 30 subjects, and each subject peforms all 6 activities, there
are a total of 180 observations, 1 for each (subject, activity) pair.

## other variables

Each of the other variables is obtained from one corresponding variable in the
UCI HAR Dataset. result.txt only extracts the variables in the UCI HAR Dataset
that is a "mean()" or "std()" reading. (Note that this does _not_ include 
"meanFreq()" variables.) There are 66 such variables.

For each of these variables, the name of the variable has been reshaped by 
spelling out the abbreviations of names, removing all other characters (like
hyphens, digits, brackets, etc.), and turning everything into lowercase. Thus,
for example, feature 43 in the UCI HAR Dataset, "43 tGravityAcc-mean()-Z",
becomes "timesignalgravityaccelerometermeanzdimension".

Then, for each of the 66 variables, result.txt reports the average of that
variable among all recordings made by a particular (subject, activity) pair,
under the column called "average<insert variable name>". For example, subject 2
made 48 recordings of the activity "laying", so result.txt will report the
average of the variable "timesignalgravityaccelerometermeanzdimension" across
the 48 recordings, under the column
"averagetimesignalgravityaccelerometermeanzdimension".

Since each feature is normalised and bounded within [-1,1], so is each variable
in result.txt. As such there are no units.